1.3 billion years ago in a distant
distant galaxy two black holes locked
into a spiral falling inexorably towards
each other and collided converting three
suns worth of stuff into pure energy in
the tenth of a second for that brief
moment in time the glow was brighter
than all the stars in all the galaxies
in all of the known universe it was a
very big bang but they didn't release
their energy in light I mean you know
their black holes all that energy was
pumped into the fabric of space and time
itself making the universe explode in
gravitational waves let me give you a
sense of the time scale at work here 1.3
billion years ago earth had just managed
to evolve multicellular life since then
earth is made and evolved corals fish
plants dinosaurs people and even
Godzilla the internet about 25 years ago
a particularly audacious set of people
Ray Weiss at MIT Kip Thorne and Ronald
raver at Caltech decided that it would
be really neat to build a giant laser
detector with which to search for the
gravitational waves from things like
colliding black holes now most people
thought they were not but enough people
realized that they were brilliant nuts
that the US National Science Foundation
decided to fund their crazy idea so
after decades of development
construction and imagination and
breathtaking amount of hard work they
built their detector called LIGO the
laser interferometer gravitational-wave
wave observatory for the last several
years lag has been undergoing a huge
expansion in its accuracy a tremendous
improvement in its detection ability
it's now called advanced LIGO as a
result in early September of 2015
LIGO turned on for a tight final test
run while they sorted out a few
lingering details and on September 14th
of 2015 just days after the detector had
gone live the gravitational waves from
those colliding black holes passed
through the earth and they passed the
review and me and they passed through
the detector there's two moments in my
life that are more emotionally intense
than that one of them is the birth of my
daughter the other is when I had to say
goodbye to my father when he was
terminally ill you know it was the
payoff of my career basically everything
they've been working on it's no longer
science fiction so that's my very good
friend and collaborator Scott Hughes a
theoretical physicist at MIT who's been
studying gravitational waves from black
holes and the signals that they could
impart on observatories like LIGO for
the past 23 years so let me take a
moment to tell you what I mean by a
gravitational wave the gravitational
wave is a ripple in the shape of space
and time as the wave passes by it
stretches space and everything in it in
one direction and compresses it in the
other this has led to countless
instructors of general relativity doing
a really silly dance to demonstrate in
their classes on general relativity it
stretches and expands it stretches and
expands so the trouble with
gravitational waves is that they're very
weak they're preposterous ly weak for
example the waves that hit us on
September 14th and yes every single one
of you stretched and compressed under
the action of that wave when the waves
hit they stretch the average person by
one part
in 10 to the 21 that's a decimal place
2000 won that's why everyone thought the
LIGO people were not even with a laser
detector five kilometers long and that's
already crazy they would have to measure
the length of those detectors to less
than one thousandth of the radius of the
nucleus of an atom and that's
preposterous so towards the end of his
classic text on gravity
LIGO co-founder Kip Thorne described the
hunt for gravitational waves as follows
he said the technical difficulties to be
surmounted in constructing such
detectors are enormous but physicists
are ingenious and with the support of a
broad lay public all obstacles will
surely be overcome Thorne published that
in 1973
42 years before he succeeded then coming
back to LIGO Scott likes to say that
LIGO acts like a year more than it does
like an eye I won't explain what that
means
visible light has a wavelength the size
that's much smaller than the things
around you the features on people's
faces the size of your cell phone and
that's really useful because it lets you
make an image or a map of the things
around you by looking at the light
coming from different spots in the scene
about you sound is different audible
sound has a wavelength that could be up
to 50 feet long and that makes it really
difficult in fact in practical purposes
impossible to make an image of something
you really care about your child's face
instead we use sound to listen for
features like pitch and tone and rhythm
and volume to infer a story behind the
sounds that's Alice talking that's Bob
interrupting silly Bob so the same is
true of gravitational waves
we can't use them to make simple images
of things out in the universe but by
listening to changes in the amplitude
and in the frequency of those waves we
can hear the story that those waves are
telling and at least for LIGO the
frequencies that it can hear are in the
audio band so if we convert the wave
patterns into pressure waves in air into
sound we can literally hear the universe
speaking to us for example listening to
gravity just in this way can tell us a
lot about the collision of two black
holes something that my colleague Scott
has spent an awful lot of time thinking
about if the two black holes are non
spinning you get a very simple chirp
work if the two bodies are spinning very
rapidly I have that same chirp but with
a modulation on top of it so it kind of
goes remember it's sort of the
vocabulary of spin imprinted on this
waveform so on September 14th 2015 a day
that's definitely going to live in my
memory
LIGO heard this so if you know how to
listen that is the sound of two black
holes each of about 30 solar masses that
were whirling around at a rate
comparable to what goes on in your
blender it's worth pausing here to think
about what that means
to black holes the dentist thing in the
universe one with the mass of 29 suns
and one with the mass of 36 suns
whirling around each other a hundred
times per second before they collide
just imagine power of that it's
fantastic and we know it because we
heard it that's the lasting importance
of lagano it's an entirely new way to
observe the universe that we've never
had before it's a way that lets us hear
the universe and hear the invisible and
there's a lot out there that we can't
see in practice or even in principle so
supernovae for example I would love to
know why very massive stars explode in
super
they're very useful we learned a lot
about the universe from them the problem
is all the interesting physics happens
in the core and the core is hidden
behind thousands of kilometers of iron
and carbon and silicon will never see
through it it's opaque the light
gravitational waves go through iron as
if it were glass totally transparent the
big day I would love to be able to
explore the first few moments of the
universe but we'll never see them
because the Big Bang itself is obscured
by its own afterglow with gravitational
waves we should be able to see all the
way back to the beginning perhaps most
importantly I'm positive that there are
things out there we've never seen that
we may never be able to see and that we
haven't even imagined things that we'll
only discover by listening and in fact
even in that very first event like Oh
found things that we didn't expect
here's my colleague and one of the key
members of the LIGO collaboration Matt
Evans my colleague at MIT
addressing exactly that the kinds of
stars which produce the black hole that
we observe here are the dinosaurs of the
University of these massive things are
old from prehistoric times and the black
holes are kinda like the dinosaur bones
of which we do this archeology so it
lets us really get a whole nother angle
on what's happened in the universe and
how the stars came to be you in the end
of course how we came to be out of this
whole mess our challenge now is to be as
audacious as possible thanks to LIGO we
know how to build exquisite detectors
that can listen to the universe to the
Russell and the chirp of the cosmos our
job is to dream up and build new
observatories a whole new generation
observatories on the ground in space I
mean what could be more glorious than
listening to the Big Bang itself our job
now is to dream big dream with us thank
you